docs: Setup guide for relaying to and from a private DMS instance (#3973)
docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver: docs/content/examples/use-cases/external-relay-only-mailserver.md

---

> title: 'Use Cases | Use a public server for relaying between a private DMS instance'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Use Cases | Relay inbound and outbound mail for an internal DMS'
```

hide:
  - toc
---

## Introduction

> !!! info "Community contributed guide"
> 
>     Adapted into a guide from [this discussion](https://github.com/orgs/docker-mailserver/discussions/3965).
> 
>     **Requirements:**
> 
>     - A _public server_ with a static IP, like many VPS providers offer. It will only relay mail to DMS, no mail is stored on this system.
>     - A _private server_ (eg: a local system at home) that will run DMS.
>     - Both servers are connected to the same network via a VPN (_optional convenience for trust via the `mynetworks` setting_). We will assume below that the VPN is setup on `192.168.2.0/24`, with the _public server_ using `192.168.2.2` and the _private server_ using `192.168.2.3`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! info "Community contributed guide"

    Adapted into a guide from [this discussion](https://github.com/orgs/docker-mailserver/discussions/3965).

    **Requirements:**

    - A _public server_ with a static IP, like many VPS providers offer. It will only relay mail to DMS, no mail is stored on this system.
    - A _private server_ (eg: a local system at home) that will run DMS.
    - Both servers are connected to the same network via a VPN (_optional convenience for trust via the `mynetworks` setting_).
    
    The guide below will assume the VPN is setup on `192.168.2.0/24` with:
    
    - The _public server_ using `192.168.2.2`.
    - The _private server_ using `192.168.2.3`.
```

> The goal of this guide is to configure a _public server_ that can receive inbound mail and relay that over to DMS on a _private server_, which can likewise submit mail outbound through a _public server_ or service. The primary motivation is keep your mail storage private, instead of storing unencrypted on a VPS host disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this guide is to configure a _public server_ that can receive inbound mail and relay that over to DMS on a _private server_, which can likewise submit mail outbound through a _public server_ or service.

The primary motivation is to keep your mail storage private, instead of storing unencrypted on a VPS host disk.
```

  
## DNS setup

Follow our [standard guidance][docs::usage-dns-setup] for DNS setup.

> !!! example "DNZ Zone file example"
> 
>     - A public reachable IP address of `11.22.33.44`
>     - Mail for `@example.com` addreses has an MX record to `mail.example.com` which resolves to that _public server_ IP.
>     - Set your A, MX and PTR records for the _public server_ as if it were running DMS.
> 
>     ```txt
>     $ORIGIN example.com
>     @     IN  A      123.123.123.123
>     mail  IN  A      123.123.123.123
> 
>     ; mail server for example.com
>     @     IN  MX  10 mail.example.com.
>     ```
> 
>     SPF records should also be setup as you normally would for `mail.example.com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Set your A, MX and PTR records for the _public server_ as if it were running DMS.

!!! example "DNZ Zone file example"
    
    For this guide we assume DNS is configured with:

    - A public reachable IP address of `11.22.33.44`
    - Mail for `@example.com` addresses should have an MX record to `mail.example.com` which A record then resolves to the IP of your _public server_.

    ```txt
    $ORIGIN example.com
    @     IN  A      11.22.33.44
    mail  IN  A      11.22.33.44

    ; mail server for example.com
    @     IN  MX  10 mail.example.com.
    ```

    SPF records should also be setup as you normally would for `mail.example.com`.
```

## Public Server (Basic Postfix setup)

You will need to install Postfix on your _public server_. The functionality that is needed for this setup is not yet implemented in DMS, so a vanilla Postfix will probably be easier to work with, especially since this server will only be used as an inbound and outbound relay.

It's necessary to adjust some settings afterwards.

???+ example "Postfix main config"

    Create or replace `/etc/postfix/main.cf` with this content:

>     ```txt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```cf
```

---
title: 'Use Cases | Relay inbound and outbound mail for an internal DMS'
hide:
  - toc
---

## Introduction

!!! info "Community contributed guide"

    Adapted into a guide from [this discussion](https://github.com/orgs/docker-mailserver/discussions/3965).

    **Requirements:**

    - A _public server_ with a static IP, like many VPS providers offer. It will only relay mail to DMS, no mail is stored on this system.
    - A _private server_ (eg: a local system at home) that will run DMS.
    - Both servers are connected to the same network via a VPN (_optional convenience for trust via the `mynetworks` setting_).

    ---

    The guide below will assume the VPN is setup on `192.168.2.0/24` with:

    - The _public server_ using `192.168.2.2`
    - The _private server_ using `192.168.2.3`

The goal of this guide is to configure a _public server_ that can receive inbound mail and relay that over to DMS on a _private server_, which can likewise submit mail outbound through a _public server_ or service.

> The primary motivation is to keep your mail storage private, instead of storing to disk unencrypted on a VPS host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The primary motivation is to keep your mail storage private instead of storing it to disk unencrypted on a VPS host.
```

## DNS setup

Follow our [standard guidance][docs::usage-dns-setup] for DNS setup.

Set your A, MX and PTR records for the _public server_ as if it were running DMS.

!!! example "DNS Zone file example"
    

>     For this guide we assume DNS is configured with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For this guide, we assume DNS is configured with:
```

    - A public reachable IP address of `11.22.33.44`

>     - Mail for `@example.com` addresses should have an MX record to `mail.example.com` which A record then resolves to the IP of your _public server_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Mail for `@example.com` addresses must have an MX record pointing to `mail.example.com`.
    - An A record for `mail.example.com` pointing to the IP address of your _public server_.
```

    ```txt
    $ORIGIN example.com
    @     IN  A      11.22.33.44
    mail  IN  A      11.22.33.44

    ; mail server for example.com
    @     IN  MX  10 mail.example.com.
    ```

>     SPF records should also be setup as you normally would for `mail.example.com`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    SPF records should also be set up as you normally would for `mail.example.com`.
```

            # Customizations relevant to this guide:
            myhostname = mail.example.com
            myorigin = example.com
            mydestination = localhost
            mynetworks = 127.0.0.0/8 [::ffff:127.0.0.0]/104 [::1]/128 192.168.2.0/24
            smtpd_relay_restrictions = permit_mynetworks permit_sasl_authenticated defer_unauth_destination
            transport_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/transport
            relay_domains = $mydestination, hash:/etc/postfix/relay

            # Disable local system accounts and delivery:
            local_recipient_maps =
            local_transport = error:local mail delivery is disabled
            ```

        Let's highlight some of the important parts:

        - Avoid including `mail.example.com` in `mydestination`, in fact you can just set `localhost` or nothing at all here as we want all mail to be relayed to our _private server_ (DMS).
        - `mynetworks` should contain your VPN network (_eg: `192.168.2.0/24` subnet_).
        - Important are `transport_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/transport` and `relay_domains = $mydestination, hash:/etc/postfix/relay`, with their file contents covered below.

>         - For good measure also disable `local_recipient_maps`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - For good measure, also disable `local_recipient_maps`.
```

        !!! example "Create `/etc/postfix/transport`"

            ```txt
            example.com relay:[192.168.2.3]:25
            ```

            **Other considerations:**

            - If you have multiple domains, you can add them here too (on separate lines).
            - If you use a smarthost add `* relay:[X.X.X.X]:port` to the bottom (eg: `* relay:[relay1.org]:587`), which will relay everything outbound via this relay host.

        !!! tip

            Instead of a file, you could alternatively configure `main.cf` with `transport_maps = inline:{ example.com=relay:[192.168.2.3]:25 }`

    === "Configure recipient domains to relay mail"

        We want `example.com` to be relayed inbound and everything else relayed outbound.

        [`relay_domains`][postfix-docs::relay_domains] is configured with a file with a list of domains that should be relayed (one per line), the 2nd value is required but can be anything.

        !!! example "Create `/etc/postfix/relay`"

            ```txt
            example.com   OK
            *             OK

>             ```

Author: I think that was for outbound relay via a smarthost. If you only need inbound relays, you won't need that, yea. I don't use that part anymore tbh, so I'm ok with omitting it.

>         !!! example "Create `/etc/postfix/relay`"
> 
>             ```txt
>             example.com   OK
>             *             OK
>             ```

Reviewer: > I think that was for outbound relay via a smarthost.

Should only be using sender-dependent relayhosts or `relayhost` setting for a default outbound smarthost.

This is for relaying recipient domains that are inbound to your public Postfix server AFAIK? (_that does include from private DMS_) Seems like it may have been a misunderstanding, so advising to remove as this advice could possibly be exploited by a spammer I think.

```suggestion
        !!! example "Create `/etc/postfix/relay`"

            ```txt
            example.com   OK
            ```
```

        !!! tip

            Instead of a file, you could alternatively configure `main.cf` with `relay_domains = example.com`.

> !!! note "Files configured with `hash:` table type must run `postmap` to apply changes"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! note "Files configured with `hash:` table type must run `postmap` to apply changes."
```

    Run `postmap /etc/postfix/transport` and `postmap /etc/postfix/relay` after creating or updating either of these files, this processes them into a separate file for Postfix to use.

## Private Server (Running DMS)

> You can setup your DMS instance as you normally would.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can set up your DMS instance as you normally would.
```

> - Be careful to not give it a hostname of `mail.example.com`. Instead use `internal-mail.example.com` or something similar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Be careful not to give it a hostname of `mail.example.com`. Instead, use `internal-mail.example.com` or something similar.
```

- DKIM can be setup as usual since it considers checks whether the message body has been tampered with, which our public relay doesn't do. Set DKIM up for `mail.example.com`.

> Next we need to configure our _private server_ to relay all outbound mail through the _public server_ (or a separate smarthost service). The setup is [similar to the default relay setup][docs::relay-host-details].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we need to configure our _private server_ to relay all outbound mail through the _public server_ (or a separate smarthost service). The setup is [similar to the default relay setup][docs::relay-host-details].
```

---
title: 'Use Cases | Relay inbound and outbound mail for an internal DMS'
hide:
  - toc
---

## Introduction

!!! info "Community contributed guide"

    Adapted into a guide from [this discussion](https://github.com/orgs/docker-mailserver/discussions/3965).

    **Requirements:**

    - A _public server_ with a static IP, like many VPS providers offer. It will only relay mail to DMS, no mail is stored on this system.
    - A _private server_ (eg: a local system at home) that will run DMS.
    - Both servers are connected to the same network via a VPN (_optional convenience for trust via the `mynetworks` setting_).

    ---

    The guide below will assume the VPN is setup on `192.168.2.0/24` with:

    - The _public server_ using `192.168.2.2`
    - The _private server_ using `192.168.2.3`

The goal of this guide is to configure a _public server_ that can receive inbound mail and relay that over to DMS on a _private server_, which can likewise submit mail outbound through a _public server_ or service.

The primary motivation is to keep your mail storage private, instead of storing to disk unencrypted on a VPS host.

## DNS setup

> Follow our [standard guidance][docs::usage-dns-setup] for DNS setup.
> 
> 
> Set your A, MX and PTR records for the _public server_ as if it were running DMS.
> 
> !!! example "DNZ Zone file example"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow our [standard guidance][docs::usage-dns-setup] for DNS setup.

Set your A, MX and PTR records for the _public server_ as if it were running DMS.

!!! example "DNS Zone file example"
```

            ```txt
            example.com relay:[192.168.2.3]:25
            ```

            **Other considerations:**

            - If you have multiple domains, you can add them here too (on separate lines).
            - If you use a smarthost add `* relay:[X.X.X.X]:port` to the bottom (eg: `* relay:[relay1.org]:587`), which will relay everything outbound via this relay host.

        !!! tip

            Instead of a file, you could alternatively configure `main.cf` with `transport_maps = inline:{ example.com=relay:[192.168.2.3]:25 }`

    === "Configure recipient domains to relay mail"

        We want `example.com` to be relayed inbound and everything else relayed outbound.

        [`relay_domains`][postfix-docs::relay_domains] is configured with a file with a list of domains that should be relayed (one per line), the 2nd value is required but can be anything.

        !!! example "Create `/etc/postfix/relay`"

            ```txt
            example.com   OK
            *             OK
            ```

        !!! tip

            Instead of a file, you could alternatively configure `main.cf` with `relay_domains = example.com`.

> !!! note "Files configured with `hash:` table type must run `postmap` to apply changes."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! note "Files configured with `hash:` table type must run `postmap` to apply changes"
```
